In this lesson we're going to look at a
particular type
of function, commonly called a Boolean
function or a predicate function.
These types of functions are used as
helper functions
and return a true or false value, a
Boolean value.
And are usually used to categorize data,
like, is the data a number?
Is the data a character?
Is the data even?
Those are the kinds of questions are
answered by predicate functions.
So what you see before you is a program
from
earlier in this chapter where we created a
numVowels function.
And in the numVowels function, we have
this if statement
to test to see if a particular character
is a vowel.
Well, this test makes a perfect predicate
function,
because it's simply going to look at the
letter.
And if it's a, e, i, o, or u, it will
return true.
Because yes, the letter is a vowel, or
it'll
return false because no, the letter is not
a vowel.
So let's write that function.
We will call it isVowel.
The parameter will be a single letter and
then we can copy this code.
We'll have to make a change to it since we
have
a different variable to test but we can
still use it.
Let's line it up first and then where
we see string[i] we'll replace that with
letter.
I'll do this manually, you can watch along
with me, one more to go.
So right here.
If the letter is a vowel then we want to
return the value true.
Otherwise, else, we wanna return the value
false.
That makes our predicate function isVowel.
It looks at a letter and if it's a, e, i,
o, or u, then
it is a vowel and it returns the
value true, otherwise it returns the value
false.
So now we can go to numVowels, take out
this test and replace it with the isVowel
function.
And look how cleaner numVowels is now.
So what we've accomplished by adding the
predicate
function is we've now made numVowels
easier to read.
And that's one of the advantages of using
functions in the first place.
So let's test this code,
with a couple simple examples.
Let's clear the screen here.
I named my program predicate.py so we'll
run that.
Let's try a simple string and it says
there are two vowels, let's try a longer
string.
And there we have three.
So again, a predicate function simply
examines a piece
of data and returns a true or false value.
Based on what it finds in the comparison.
So that wraps up this lesson on predicates
and later on in
the chapter, in the exercises we'll
have another look at writing predicate
functions.